Now I'll cover a few helpful tips, and then we'll wrap up with a summary.
Probably one of the best tips that I can give you is
early detection equals prevention.
Now you may have heard of this kind of cute line,
"The sooner you fall behind, the more time you'll have to catch up.
" And that's pretty cute, pretty funny,
and we have that on coffee cups sometimes.
But let's say this again with a slight twist to you it.
"The sooner you know that you're behind,
… the more time you'll have to catch up.
" And you'll know you're behind by using this variance
analysis we talked about in this section.
So other activities for early detection would be certainly project control
planning all the things you've learned in this module.
Also, effective communication management.
So there was a big piece of communication in one of
the key elements of project control,
and we're going to talk a little bit more about different types
of communication in the following module.
Also, project monitoring, of course.
We want to look at risks, issues,
and variances at all times and be a very proactive project manager as well.
So several of these items will help you be just a better
project manager and stay on track.
We've talked about a lot of project control activities and elements,
so what should the right level of effort be?
How much time and effort should you put into project control?
Let's check that out.
The right level of effort may be hard to figure out,
but in other words how much time, effort,
planning, and process do you put into project control?
Each organization, and maybe even each project, will be a little different.
So there's really no need for a lot of a lot of project
control overhead if the project say is small.
Determine what large and small is to your organization,
and apply the right level of tools and processes accordingly.
Also,
the level of expertise of the people involved in the
project may be of interest as well.
So if people have familiarity with the business and the organization and
with potential solutions and their technical implications,
you may not need as much overhead with project control.
On the other hand,
people with less experience may need more formal processes to guide them.
Risks,
the level of risks the company can tolerate versus the amount
of project management practices applied.
So here's a rule of thumb regarding that.
The greater the risk to the business, typically relating to money of course,
the greater the need and the amount of project
management best practices you should apply.
Next,
what's the organization's ability to mitigate risks that may occur from
insufficient application of project management practices?
An organization that has flexibility in adding resources,
removing or adding scope,
or pushing dates back might require a smaller amount of project management
practices than an organization that has little flexibility.
Also,
the level of trust between you the project manager
and the team and the stakeholders.
This is an interesting one.
Trust allows stakeholders to be more accommodating and make tradeoffs.
Trust sometimes encourages bolder project plans,
and that's really good if a company wants to get out ahead of the curve and
really make a difference with projects in their company.
And the greater the trust, the better and smoother the project,
and, therefore, the greater the outcome.
Now let's cover a few more tips.
Here are a few more tips.
Allocate enough time to perform your project control duties.
You'll be very busy and have lots to do,
but if you don't devote the right level of effort you're going to have trouble
managing your project and finding out just where you are.
Are you ahead of schedule, behind schedule, ahead of budget, or behind budget?
So be sure you allocate enough time to make sure you do
an adequate job of project control.
Next, if you don't track your progress, you are to me,
by definition, out of control.
You can't manage or monitor a project without tracking progress.
There are lots of easy and hard ways to do this.
There's web-based tracking systems, spreadsheets, you name it.
Use them, track your time, track your budget at all times.
There's going to be changes that happen in your project.
Embrace those changes head on, and then work with them,
deal with them, and manage them.
That's why it's so important to have a change control
process like we talked about earlier,
which includes how to add things to the list and how
they can be approved and prioritized.
And if you don't know what's expected, any outcome will do,
so know your completion criteria.
That is your expected outcome, your milestones,
your feature sets, your release elements,
etc.
Also, begin with initial baselines of your schedule,
budget, scope, and other variance elements that you might come up with.
This is a key part of your job, and you need to lay these out.
Determine, measure,
and broadcast or communicate progress accurately and consistently,
so you'll definitely need a reporting plan.
Avoid all unplanned work outside of your change control process.
What?
You don't have a change control process?
Then all your work is unplanned and out of control.
Institute a change control process.
There should be all work come through that process.
It'll be prioritized, worked on,
maybe put in the parking lot to be worked on later.
That is planned work that you don't do.
You see the difference?
True unplanned work is out there in the ether somewhere,
but the change control process will manage all work intake,
very important.
And lastly watch out for what I call virtual work groups.
When your project team is not physically in the same or close location,
sometimes it can be more difficult to get information and manage your project.
And many work groups today are in fact virtual,
remote computing and people all over the world working on projects.
In of itself that's great,
but make sure you have the right processes and tools in place to
have a firm grip and management on the project.
Okay, now let's summarize this module.
In this module you have learned that you need to determine your approach and
processes for the eight project control activities prior to beginning your
project and in fact are added to your project plan.
Then when your project begins you will then follow
each of the processes you laid out.
Okay, let's summarize.
Communication and change management.
Communication, aka reporting management,
we discussed what you will say, the content,
and to whom you'll say it too, such as your stakeholders.
Effective communication is critical to the project's success, so get good at it.
Change is a part of business life, so be flexible and agile,
and have a solid process for managing change.
Configuration management is controlling the versions and
content of the project deliverables,
and requirements management is ensuring that all requirements are identified,
tracked, and managed.
Both of these are tightly coupled.
Since you will add requirements,
you will need to plan what version they will be part
of and when they will be delivered.
Risks, remember,
are those things that might happen to the project that you want to be aware of,
keep an eye on, tag,
and track where issues are known items that are currently
impacting your project such as software defects that you'll
need to track and disposition.
Procurement management is the activity of working with outside third-party
vendors either directly or through your procurement organization.
In this actually we emphasize the importance of ---.
In this section we emphasized the importance of service level
agreements and key performance indicators as well to help manage
the performance of your suppliers.
Now quality management, I think this is an easy one.
Just plan and execute the other seven project control activities,
and you will have great quality.
But also we did discuss some simple techniques that your team
can use such as checklists and templates,
which allow you to implement consistently and,
therefore, quality in common team activities.
Variance analysis.
This is an approach to help you determine if your project is on track or not.
Remember,
you will be constantly asked if you are on track and if not by how much and why,
so you'll want to be able to quickly pull out some
charts and impress your stakeholders.
Lastly we talked about some tips, the right level of effort.
In other words, don't undermanage or over manage.
Of course I know this is easier said than done, but you get the idea.
Always strive for early detection,
which means you will need the right controls or variances in place so
you can quickly see the health of your project.
Okay,
in the next module on project execution we will discuss how
you can be more effective at communication and leadership with your customers and teammates, so I'll see you in the next module.